Update to the Intro to Airflow guide (#412)
astronomer/airflow-guides: guides/intro-to-airflow.md

Airflow has many key benefits, such as:

- **Dynamic data pipelines**: In Airflow, pipelines are defined as Python code. Anything you can do in Python, you can do in Airflow.
- **CI/CD for data pipelines**: With all the logic of your workflows defined in Python, it is possible to implement CI/CD processes for your data pipelines.
- **Tool agnosticism**: Airflow can connect with any other tool in the data ecosystem that allows connection through an API.
- **High extensibility**: For many commonly used data engineering tools, integrations exist in the form of provider packages, which are routinely extended and updated.
- **Infinite scalability**: Given enough computing power, you can orchestrate as many processes as you need, no matter how complex your pipelines get.
- **Visualization**: Airflow comes with a fully functional UI that offers an immediate overview over data pipelines.
- **Stable REST API**: The [Airflow REST API](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/stable-rest-api-ref.html) allows Airflow to interact with RESTful web services.

> - **Easy to use**: Thanks to the [Astro CLI](ttps://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/get-started), you can get a fully functional local Airflow instance running with only three bash commands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Easy to use**: Thanks to the [Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/get-started), you can get a fully functional local Airflow instance running with only three bash commands.
```

- **Vibrant OSS community**: With millions of users and thousands of contributors, Airflow is here to stay and grow.

## When to use Airflow

> Airflow can be used for virtually any batch data pipelines, and there are a ton of [documented use cases](https://github.com/jghoman/awesome-apache-airflow#best-practices-lessons-learned-and-cool-use-cases) in the community. Because of its extensibility, Airflow is particularly powerful for orchestrating jobs with complex dependencies in multiple external systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Airflow can be used for virtually any batch data pipelines, and there are a ton of documented use cases in the community. Because of its extensibility, Airflow is particularly powerful for orchestrating jobs with complex dependencies in multiple external systems.
```
Removing the link here since it isn't to something of ours and I'm not sure how up to date it is.

Reviewer: Actually, let's relink that text with the podcast that's linked below, and then remove the note.

- [Database](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-database): A database where all DAG and task metadata are stored. This is typically a Postgres database, but MySQL, MsSQL, and SQLite are also supported.
- [Executor](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-executors-explained/): The mechanism that defines how the available computing resources are used to execute tasks. An executor is running within the Scheduler whenever Airflow is up.

Additionally, you may also have the following situational components:

- Triggerer: A separate process which supports [deferrable operators](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/deferrable-operators). This component is optional and must be run separately.
- Worker: The process that executes tasks, as defined by the executor. Depending on which executor you choose, you may or may not have workers as part of your Airflow infrastructure.

> **Note**: You can learn more about the Airflow infrastructure in the [Airflow's Components](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-components/) guide.

## Resources

While it is easy to get started with Airflow, there are many more concepts and possibilities to explore. You can learn more by checking out:

> - [Astronomer Webinars](https://www.astronomer.io/events/webinars/), which cover concepts and use cases in-depth and offer the possibility to ask us questions live on air.

Reviewer: Let's add the Astro CLI in its own bullet here, and say something like "The Astro CLI, which is the easiest way to get Airflow running locally."

date: 2018-05-21T00:00:00.000Z
slug: "intro-to-airflow"
heroImagePath: null
tags: ["Basics", "Intro", "Concepts", "Start"]
---

[Apache Airflow](https://airflow.apache.org/) is the de facto standard for programmatic data orchestration. Airflow is freely available as open source software, has over 9 million downloads per month and a vibrant OSS community.

Data practitioners are choosing Airflow because it allows them to define their data pipelines as Python code in a highly extensible and infinitely scalable way. Since Airflow is tool agnostic is the glue that holds your data ecosystem together.

This guide offers an introduction to Apache Airflow and its core concepts. We will cover:

- The history behind Apache Airflow
- Why to use Airflow
- When to use Airflow
- Basic concepts and terminology
- A list of advanced concepts to explore
- Resources to learn more.

> **Quickstart**: If you like learning by doing you can follow the Get Started with Airflow tutorial to get a practical introduction to Apache Airflow, complementary to this guide.

> ## Assumed Knowledge

Author: I am not sure if we should give Python as assumed knowledge here or just have a line that says "This guide does not assume any previous knowledge of Airflow" or something like that.

Reviewer: I think it's fair to put Python knowledge for the highest level intro one like this

The following resources are recommended:

- [Official Python Tutorial](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/index.html)

## History

Airflow started as an open source project at Airbnb. In 2015 they were growing rapidly and the facing larger amounts of internal data every day. To achieve the vision of becoming a fully data-driven organization, they had to grow their workforce of data engineers, data scientists, and analysts — all of whom had to regularly automate processes by writing scheduled batch jobs. To satisfy the need for a robust scheduling tool, [Maxime Beauchemin](https://soundcloud.com/the-airflow-podcast/the-origins-of-airflow) created and open-sourced Airflow with the idea that it would allow them to quickly author, iterate on, and monitor their batch data pipelines.

Since Maxime's first commit way back then, Airflow has come a long way. The project joined the official Apache Foundation Incubator in April of 2016, where it lived and grew until it graduated as a top-level project in January 2019. As of August 2022 Airflow has over 2'000 contributors, 16'900 commits and 26'900 stars on [GitHub](https://github.com/apache/airflow).

> On December 17th 2020, [Airflow 2.0](https://www.astronomer.io/blog/introducing-airflow-2-0) was released, bringing with it major upgrades and powerful new features. Airflow is used by thousands of Data Engineering teams around the world and continues to be adopted as the community grows stronger.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On December 17th 2020, [Airflow 2.0](https://www.astronomer.io/blog/introducing-airflow-2-0) was released, bringing with it major upgrades and powerful new features. Airflow is used by thousands of data engineering teams around the world and continues to be adopted as the community grows stronger.
```

## Why to use Airflow

> [Apache Airflow](https://airflow.apache.org/index.html) is a platform for programmatically authoring, scheduling, and monitoring workflows. It is open source and especially useful in architecting and orchestrating complex data pipelines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Apache Airflow](https://airflow.apache.org/index.html) is a platform for programmatically authoring, scheduling, and monitoring workflows. It is open source, and especially useful in architecting and orchestrating complex data pipelines.
```

Data orchestration sits at the heart of any modern data stack and provides elaborate automation of data pipelines. With orchestration, actions in your data pipeline become aware of each other and your data team has a central location to gain insight into, edit and debug their workflows.

> Airflow has many key benefits like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Airflow has many key benefits, such as:
```

> - **Dynamic data pipelines**: In Airflow pipelines are defined as Python code. Anything you can do in Python, you can do in Airflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Dynamic data pipelines**: In Airflow, pipelines are defined as Python code. Anything you can do in Python, you can do in Airflow.
```

> - **CI/CD for data pipelines**: With all logic of your workflows defined in Python it is possible to implement CI/CD processes for your data pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **CI/CD for data pipelines**: With all the logic of your workflows defined in Python, it is possible to implement CI/CD processes for your data pipelines.
```

> - **Tool agnosticism**: Airflow can connect with any other tool in the Data Engineering space that allows connection through an API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Tool agnosticism**: Airflow can connect with any other tool in the data ecosystem that allows connection through an API.
```

> - **High Extensibility**: For many commonly used data engineering tools, integrations exist in form of provider packages, which are routinely extended and updated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **High extensibility**: For many commonly used data engineering tools, integrations exist in the form of provider packages, which are routinely extended and updated.
```

> - **Infinite Scalability**: given enough computing power you can orchestrate as many processes as you need, no matter how complex your pipelines get.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Infinite scalability**: Given enough computing power, you can orchestrate as many processes as you need, no matter how complex your pipelines get.
```

> - **Visualization**: Airflow comes with a fully functional UI that offers immediate overview over data pipelines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Visualization**: Airflow comes with a fully functional UI that offers an immediate overview over data pipelines.
```

> - **Stable REST API**:

Reviewer: Missing the description on this one :)

Author: 👀 oops. Sorry about that!

> - **Easy of use**: thanks to the [Astro CLI](ttps://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/get-started) you can get a fully functional local dockerized Airflow instance running with only three bash commands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Easy of use**: Thanks to the [Astro CLI](ttps://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/get-started), you can get a fully functional local Airflow instance running with only three bash commands.
```

> - **Vibrant OSS community**: with millions of users Airflow is here to stay and grow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Vibrant OSS community**: With millions of users and thousands of contributors, Airflow is here to stay and grow.
```

> > **Note**: Astronomer is a company providing managed Airflow in production as a service to cooperations. We work closely with the OSS Airflow community and provide open source tools like the [Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/get-started), [the Astronomer provider](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/astronomer-providers) and resources like guides, webinars and the [Astronomer Registry](https://registry.astronomer.io/).

Author: Apart from the ad aspect I put this in because before working here I didn't know how companies can interact with open source and. If it is too much of an ad we can ofc take it out :)

Reviewer: I think it's good to mention, but I'm guessing once we complete the migration we'll have better marketing/astronomer site integration with guides which would take care of this. That to say, let's leave it out for now and we may add it back later depending on what things look like after the redesign :)

## When to use Airflow

Airflow can be used for virtually any batch data pipelines, and there are a ton of [documented use cases](https://github.com/jghoman/awesome-apache-airflow#best-practices-lessons-learned-and-cool-use-cases) in the community. Because of its extensibility, Airflow is particularly powerful for orchestrating jobs with complex dependencies in multiple external systems.

For example, the diagram below shows a complex use case that can easily be accomplished with Airflow. By writing pipelines in code and using Airflow's many available providers, you can integrate with any number of different, dependent systems with just a single platform for orchestration and monitoring.

> ![Example Use Case](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/intro-to-airflow/example_pipeline.png)

Author: I just saw the copy pasted piece of operator code in this picture. I'd remove that part and just have the conceptual pipeline, if you agree that it looks a bit odd?

Reviewer: Yeah go ahead and remove it. That used to be part of a 2-step slide transition we used in presentations, but it's a bit outdated and doesn't translate super well to a screenshot.

Some common use cases of Airflow include:

> - **ETL/ELT pipelines**: for example running a write, audit, publish pattern on data in Snowflake as shown in the example implementation in the [Orchestrating Snowflake Queries with Airflow](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-snowflake/) guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **ETL/ELT pipelines**: For example, running a write, audit, publish pattern on data in Snowflake as shown in the example implementation in the [Orchestrating Snowflake Queries with Airflow](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-snowflake/) guide.
```

> - **MLOps**: for example using Airflow with Tensorflow and MLFlow as shown in [this webinar](https://www.astronomer.io/events/webinars/using-airflow-with-tensorflow-mlflow/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **MLOps**: For example, using Airflow with Tensorflow and MLFlow as shown in [this webinar](https://www.astronomer.io/events/webinars/using-airflow-with-tensorflow-mlflow/).
```

> - **Operationalized Analytics**: for example orchestrating a pipeline to extract insights from your data and display them in dashboards, an implementation of which is showcased in the [Using Airflow as a Data Analyst](https://www.astronomer.io/events/webinars/using-airflow-as-a-data-analyst/) webinar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Operationalized Analytics**: For example, orchestrating a pipeline to extract insights from your data and display them in dashboards, an implementation of which is showcased in the [Using Airflow as a Data Analyst](https://www.astronomer.io/events/webinars/using-airflow-as-a-data-analyst/) webinar.
```

> > **Note**: If you are interested in diving deeper into use cases give this [Astronomer podcast](https://soundcloud.com/the-airflow-podcast/use-cases) episode a listen!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note**: If you are interested in diving deeper into use cases, give this [Astronomer podcast](https://soundcloud.com/the-airflow-podcast/use-cases) episode a listen!
```

## Core Airflow Concepts

> To navigate Airflow resources it is helpful to have a general understanding of  core Airflow concepts:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To navigate Airflow resources, it is helpful to have a general understanding of core Airflow concepts:
```

> - **DAG**: Directed Acyclic Graph. An Airflow DAG is a workflow defined as a graph where all dependencies between nodes are directed and does not contain circles. For more information on Airflow DAGs see the [Introduction to Airflow DAGs](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/dags/) guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **DAG**: Directed Acyclic Graph. An Airflow DAG is a workflow defined as a graph, where all dependencies between nodes are directed and nodes do not self reference. For more information on Airflow DAGs, see the [Introduction to Airflow DAGs](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/dags/) guide.
```

> - **Dagrun**: The execution of a DAG at a specific point in time is called a Dagrun. A DAG can have scheduled Dagruns for example hourly or daily and manually triggered Dagruns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **DAG run**: A DAG run is the execution of a DAG at a specific point in time. A DAG can have scheduled DAG runs  and/or manually triggered DAG runs.
```

> - **Task**: In Airflow, a task is a node in a DAG graph describing one unit of work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Task**: A task is a node in a DAG graph describing one unit of work.
```

> - **Task Instance**: The combination of a task in a specific DAG being executed at a specific point in time is referred to as a task instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Task Instance**: A task instance is the combination of a task, in a specific DAG, being executed at a specific point in time.
```

> When authoring DAGs you will mostly interact with Operators, the building blocks of DAGs. An operator is an abstraction over Python code designed to perform a specific action and takes the form of a function that accepts parameters. Each Operator in your DAG code corresponds to one Airflow task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When authoring DAGs, you will mostly interact with operators, the building blocks of DAGs. An operator is an abstraction over Python code designed to perform a specific action and takes the form of a function that accepts parameters. Each operator in your DAG code corresponds to one Airflow task.
```

There are three main categories of operators:

- **Action Operators** execute a function, like the [PythonOperator](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow/modules/pythonoperator) or the [BashOperator](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/scripts-bash-operator/).
- **Transfer Operators** move data from a source to a destination, like the [S3ToRedshiftOperator](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/amazon/modules/s3toredshiftoperator).
- **[Sensors](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/what-is-a-sensor/)** wait for something to happen, like the [ExternalTaskSensor](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow/modules/externaltasksensor) or the [HttpSensorAsync](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/astronomer-providers/modules/httpsensorasync).

While operators are defined individually, they can pass information to each other by using [XComs](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-passing-data-between-tasks/). You can learn more about operators in the [Operators 101](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/what-is-an-operator/) guide.

> Airflow comes with a set of preinstalled operators that can be extended by using Airflow provider packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some commonly used action operators like the PythonOperator are part of core Airflow and are automatically installed in your Airflow instance. Operators used to interact with external systems are maintained separately to Airflow in provider packages.
```

**Providers** are community-maintained packages that include all of the core operators, hooks and sensors for a given service, for example:

> - [Amazon Provider](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/amazon)

Author: Kinda unsure if this is putting too much emphasis on individual providers for an intro guide, open to deleting. (I tried to mention some of our partners here).

Reviewer: Let's keep them! I think these are good ones to list since they'll be the most frequently used.

- [Snowflake Provider](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/snowflake)
- [Google Provider](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/google)
- [Azure Provider](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/microsoft-azure)
- [Databricks Provider](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/databricks)
- [Fivetran Provider](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/fivetran)

> **Note**: The best way to explore available providers and operators is the [Astronomer Registry](https://registry.astronomer.io/)!

> **[Connections](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/connections/)** are where Airflow stores information that allows you to connect to external systems, such as authentication credentials or API tokens. This is managed directly from the UI and the actual information is encrypted and stored in the Airflow metadata database. Connections use [Hooks](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/what-is-a-hook/) as a way of interfacing with third party systems.

Reviewer: I think we should take out this bit about connections. It is an important concept, but it's in a different category than the other ones we mention and I think would probably raise more questions than it answers for users at this stage.

> ## Airflow Components

Reviewer: Let's add a link to our components guide somewhere in here https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-components/

Author: Added in a note :)

> A fully functional Airflow instance is comprised of several components. While you don't have to interact directly with them when authoring DAGs it is good to have a general idea about what they are and their functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When working with Airflow, it is important to understand its underlying components of its infrastructure. Even if you mostly interact with Airflow as a DAG author, knowing which components are “under the hood” are and why they are needed can be helpful for running developing your DAGs, debugging, and running Airflow successfully.
```

> The 4 components that are mandatory for Airflow to function are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Airflow has four core components that must be running at all times:
```

> - The **Scheduler**: schedules DAGs and tasks.
> - The **[Executor](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-executors-explained/)**: defines how the available computing resources are used to execute a task.
> - The **Webserver**: serves the [Airflow UI](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-ui/) at `localhost:8080`.
> - The **[Metadata Database]((https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-database))**: stores all metadata generated by the Airflow instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Webserver: A Flask server running with Gunicorn that serves the [Airflow UI](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-ui/).
- [Scheduler](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/concepts/scheduler.html): A Daemon responsible for scheduling jobs. This is a multi-threaded Python process that determines what tasks need to be run, when they need to be run, and where they are run.
- [Database](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-database): A database where all DAG and task metadata are stored. This is typically a Postgres database, but MySQL, MsSQL, and SQLite are also supported.
- [Executor](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-executors-explained/): The mechanism that defines how the available computing resources are used to execute tasks. An executor is running within the Scheduler whenever Airflow is up.
```

> Additionally you can have:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, you may also have the following situational components:
```

> - a **Triggerer**: which is necessary when working with [Deferrable Operators](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/deferrable-operators/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Triggerer**: A separate process which supports [deferrable operators](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/deferrable-operators). This component is optional and must be run separately.
```

> - one or more Celery **Worker**s: that distribute the task load in distributive set ups.   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Worker**: The process that executes tasks, as defined by the executor. Depending on which executor you choose, you may or may not have workers as part of your Airflow infrastructure.
```

## Resources

> While it is easy to get started with Airflow there are many more concepts and possibilities to explore. You can learn more by checking out:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While it is easy to get started with Airflow, there are many more concepts and possibilities to explore. You can learn more by checking out:
```

> - [Astronomer Webinars](https://www.astronomer.io/events/webinars/) cover concepts and use cases in-depth and offer the possibility to ask us questions live on air.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Astronomer Webinars](https://www.astronomer.io/events/webinars/), which cover concepts and use cases in-depth and offer the possibility to ask us questions live on air.
```

> - [Live with Astronomer](https://www.astronomer.io/events/live/) are hands-on and code focussed live walkthroughs of specific Airflow features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [LIVE with Astronomer](https://www.astronomer.io/events/live/), which are hands-on and code-focussed live walkthroughs of specific Airflow features.
```

> - [Astronomer Guides](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/) cover both entry and expert level concepts in Airflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Astronomer Guides](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/), which cover both entry and expert level concepts in Airflow.
```

> - The [Astronomer Academy](https://academy.astronomer.io/) offers many video tutorials and the option to purchase full length Airflow courses and to take exams to get certified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The [Astronomer Academy](https://academy.astronomer.io/), which offers many video tutorials and the option to purchase full length Airflow courses and to take exams to get certified.
```

> - The [Official Airflow Documentation](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/) contains comprehensive guidance on how to use Airflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The [Official Airflow Documentation](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/), which contains comprehensive guidance on how to use Airflow.
```

## Conclusion

> After reading this guide should should have a general idea what Apache Airflow is and how it can be used. High-level knowledge about the concept explained will give you a good foundation to dive deeper into Airflow resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After reading this guide should should have a general idea what Apache Airflow is and how it can be used. High-level knowledge about the concepts explained will give you a good foundation to dive deeper into Airflow resources.
```

> We are excited to see where your Airflow journey takes you! Please feel free to [reach out to us](https://www.astronomer.io/contact) if you have any questions or if there's anything we can do to help you succeed!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are excited to see where your Airflow journey takes you! Please feel free to [reach out to us](https://www.astronomer.io/contact) if you have any questions or if there's anything we can do to help you succeed.
```
